initial list of project ideas (#14)
MDAnalysis/UGM2023: hackathon/mdakits/projects.md

For this project you would

1. Interface [freesasa-python](https://github.com/freesasa/freesasa-python)
   [[Mitternacht 2016]](#Mitternacht2016) with MDAnalysis: Find out
   how to pass information from MDAnalysis to `freesasa` so that it
   can compute areas and volumes. 
2. Write a `SASAnalysis` class using the `AnalysisBase` framework (see
   the [tutorial on writing your own trajectory analysis][[UserGuide
   AnalysisBase]].
3. create test cases (use existing files in MDA and run external
   implementation for reference)
4. benchmark performance

### References ###

1. <a id="Mitternacht2016"/>Simon Mitternacht (2016) FreeSASA: An open
   source C library for solvent accessible surface area
   calculation. F1000Research 5:189 (doi:
   [10.12688/f1000research.7931.1](https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.7931.1))

## Contact analysis ##

**TODO**

Contact analysis (however you define it but really just something
better than native contacts)

## Structural analysis ##

**TODO**

- DSSP
- stride
- ... ?

## Voronoi tessellation ##

**TODO**

## Ring puckering ##

**TODO**

Ring puckering 

- Cremer-Pople for 6+ membered rings
- Hill Reilley, Pickett angles
- ...

> ## Converters for other libraries ##

Reviewer: Can we keep converters out of the list of things for now? (as per recent conversations)

Author: sure

trajectory. However, any other [metric][] (or distance) instead of
RMSD will also work if you can produce a suitable _similarity matrix_.

One can then use any number of [clustering][] algorithms to partition
the similarity matrix and thus assign different cluster numbers to the
different frames of the trajectory. 

MDAnalysis implements some clustering methods within the ENCORE module 
for Ensemble Similarity Calculations  (namely, Affinity Propogation and 
DBSCAN/KMeans, via scikit-learn; as described 
[in the docs here](https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/analysis/encore/clustering.html#clustering-frontend-mdanalysis-analysis-encore-clustering-clusteringmethod).
However, a more general-use cluster analysis tool, featuring a larger 
selection of clustering algorithms would likely be useful to many users.

Clustering methods could include -

* [scikit-learn clustering][] contains _many_ clustering algorithms
  that can be either used with a similarity matrix or directly with
  trajectory data like coordinates.
  
* The GROMOS clustering algorithm is widely used in biomolecular
  simulations [[Daura 1999]](#Daura1999). (See Issue

>   [#2876](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/issues/2876and has been requested)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  [#2876](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/issues/2876)
```

I think this was leftover from a previous edit?

Reviewer 2: Leaving up in case it was meant to be something

>     "To find clusters of structures in a trajectory the RMSD of atom

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  
  The following excerpt from Daura et al. describes the algorithm:
    "To find clusters of structures in a trajectory the RMSD of atom
```

[metric]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metric_space#Definition
[clustering]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cluster_analysis

[scikit-learn clustering]: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html

[UserGuide AnalysisBase]: https://userguide.mdanalysis.org/stable/examples/analysis/custom_trajectory_analysis.html

## Clustered density analysis ##

In addition to identifying different states of a biomolecule by 
clustering over e.g. RMSD (as described above), clustering can 
also be used to identify e.g. small molecule/ion binding sites 
or sidechain configurations by aligning to a ‘fixed’ reference 
(e.g. protein) and performing clustering using the coordinates 
of the group of interest. Subsequent density calculations for 
each cluster can allow for further comparison and visualization.  

### Where to start ###

> - (Independently or in conjunction with the above, create a

Reviewer 3: Unless I've misinterpreted anything, seems like there will be an initial overlap in the project and the above with creating an easier clustering interface. Not sure if we want to leave them both (and potentially have two kits with different ClusterAnalysis, move this one to be an optional extension of the above, or remove the cluster itself here and make it just a Kit for generating densities given a series of frame indices?

Author: You're right, let's do exactly what you suggest.

Author: I rewrote it to "State-based density analysis"

`ClusterAnalysis` class that allows clustering to be performed
over 3D coordinate of a selected group.)
- Create a class, making use of the existing [density analysis]( https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/analysis/density.html#module-MDAnalysis.analysis.density)

> that generates densities from a list of indicies of frames

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that generates densities from a list of indices of frames
```

## New file formats ##

MDAnalysis supports a wide range of file formats for reading/writing 
coordinates and topologies 
(https://userguide.mdanalysis.org/stable/formats/index.html). 
However, there are still some file formats that are missing - e.g.
[PDBx/mmCIF][], which has replaced the PDB format as the default 
format for the Protein Data Bank (see Issue
[#2367](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/issues/2367)).
We also welcome the addition of support for any other file formats 
we are currently missing.

### Where to start
- Identify a file format currently not supported by MDAnaylsis - if you
don't have a particular format in mind, support for PDBx/mmCIF is a
frequent request.
- Become familiar with our reader/writer API - for
[trajectory files (coordinate data)](https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/coordinates/init.html)
and [topology files (atom information)](https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/topology_modules.html)
as appropriate; and look at how existing supported file formats
are handled.
- Create a Kit featuring a new reader/writer class, using `ReaderBase`/`WriterBase`,

> for the new file format. If there are existing tool that could

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for the new file format. If there are existing tools that could
```

aid in reading this format, your Kit could use these as dependencies.

[PDBx/mmCIF]: (https://pdb101.rcsb.org/learn/guide-to-understanding-pdb-data/beginner%E2%80%99s-guide-to-pdb-structures-and-the-pdbx-mmcif-format)

## Molecular volume and surface analysis

*This is one of the most wanted analysis features missing in MDAnalysis.*

It is often necessary to measure volume and surface area of a

> biomolecule or parts of it over a MD trajectory. MDAnalysis is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
biomolecule or parts of it over an MD trajectory. MDAnalysis is
```

DSSP and/or STRIDE, implemented natively or using an external
tool as a dependency, to calculate the secondary structure of a
selection in each frame.
- Consider allowing the calculated secondary structure to be read
back alongside the trajectory e.g. using the [Auxilliary
module](https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/auxiliary/init.html),
and allow for atomselections based on secondary structure.

### References
1. <a id="Frishman1995"/>Frishman,D & Argos,P. (1995) Knowledge-based secondary structure assignment. Proteins: structure, function and genetics, 23, 566-579.
2. <a id="Kabsch1983"/>Kabsch, W. & Sander,C. (1983) Dictionary of protein secondary structure: pattern recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical features. Biopolymers, 22: 2577-2637.

## Voronoi tessellation ##

A [Voronoi diagram](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voronoi_diagram) is 
the division of a space into regions around a set of seed points such 
that each point in a given region is closer to that seed point than 
any other. Voronoi tessellations can be used in various density and 
spatial analysis, e.g. for characterizing membranes or interaction 
surfaces/binding sites. 

> Vornoi tessellation and related algorithims (e.g. Delaunay triangulation) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Voronoi tessellation and related algorithms (e.g. Delaunay triangulation) 
```

> has been implemented in scipy (https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/spatial.html#delaunay-triangulation-convex-hulls-and-voronoi-diagrams).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
have been implemented in scipy (https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/spatial.html#delaunay-triangulation-convex-hulls-and-voronoi-diagrams).
```

## Ring puckering ##

Ring groups can adopt a variety of “puckered” geometries that influence 
their physical and chemical properties. Several formulations exist for 
quantifying this puckering, e.g. Pickett angles [[Strauss 1970]](#Strauss1970), 
Cremer-Pople [[Cremer 1975]](#Cremer1975), and Hill-Reilly [[Hill 2007]](#Hill2007).

MDAnalysis currently features tools for assessing puckering in 5-membered 
rings in our [nucleic acid analysis module](https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/analysis/nuclinfo.html), 

> however such capabilities are lacking for 6 (or higher) membered rings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
rings in our [nucleic acid analysis module](https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/analysis/nuclinfo.html); 
however, such capabilities are lacking for 6 (or higher) membered rings.
```

# Project Ideas for MDAKits Hackathon

While at the hackathon you can work on anything you want --- all the
developers are here to support you to build something amazing. If you
want some inspiration, here are some ideas that the wider MDAnalysis
community would really want to see. These ideas are in _random order_.

## Trajectory clustering ##

It is common to use unsupervised learning algorithms to cluster a
trajectory by similarity to discover different states.

A typical approach is to first calculate the RMSD of a structure with
itself across all trajectory frames, forming a $T \times T$ symmetric
RMSD matrix where $T$ is the number of frames in the
trajectory. However, any other [metric][] (or distance) instead of
RMSD will also work if you can produce a suitable _similarity matrix_.

One can then use any number of [clustering][] algorithms to partition
the similarity matrix and thus assign different cluster numbers to the
different frames of the trajectory. 

MDAnalysis implements some clustering methods within the ENCORE module 
for Ensemble Similarity Calculations  (namely, Affinity Propogation and 
DBSCAN/KMeans, via scikit-learn; as described 

> [in the docs here](https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/analysis/encore/clustering.html#clustering-frontend-mdanalysis-analysis-encore-clustering-clusteringmethod).

Reviewer: point to mdaencore here instead?

Author: Done in [b52168a](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/UGM2023/pull/14/commits/b52168a1ebf6de8087a2b38fb8069d83726bca21)

> MDAnalysis implements some clustering methods within the ENCORE module 
> for Ensemble Similarity Calculations  (namely, Affinity Propogation and 
> DBSCAN/KMeans, via scikit-learn; as described 
> [in the docs here](https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/analysis/encore/clustering.html#clustering-frontend-mdanalysis-analysis-encore-clustering-clusteringmethod).

Author: ```suggestion
The [mdaencore](https://www.mdanalysis.org/mdaencore/) MDAKit for Ensemble Similarity Calculations 
also implements some clustering methods (namely, Affinity Propogation and 
DBSCAN/KMeans, via scikit-learn; as described 
[in the docs here](https://www.mdanalysis.org/mdaencore/autosummary/mdaencore.clustering.ClusteringMethod.html#module-mdaencore.clustering.ClusteringMethod)).
```

biomolecule or parts of it over an MD trajectory. MDAnalysis is
currently lacking this important functionality. In this project you
will implement an analysis class that calculates the molecular volume
and area for an atomgroup as a function of time. See issue
[#2439](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/issues/2439).

The [FreeSASA](http://freesasa.github.io/) library appears to be a
suitable tool to integrate into MDAnalysis. It comes under MIT license
and has a C core and python bindings:
* C-library: https://github.com/mittinatten/freesasa
* Python bindings: https://github.com/freesasa/freesasa-python

> By default Lee & Richards' algorithm is used, but Shrake & Rupley's
> is also available.

### Objectives

For this project you would

1. Interface [freesasa-python](https://github.com/freesasa/freesasa-python)
   [[Mitternacht 2016]](#Mitternacht2016) with MDAnalysis: Find out
   how to pass information from MDAnalysis to `freesasa` so that it
   can compute areas and volumes. 
2. Write a `SASAnalysis` class using the `AnalysisBase` framework (see
   the [tutorial on writing your own trajectory analysis][UserGuide
   AnalysisBase].

> 3. create test cases (use existing files in MDA and run external

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create test cases (use existing files in MDA and run external
```

   implementation for reference)

> 4. benchmark performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Benchmark performance
```

the division of a space into regions around a set of seed points such 
that each point in a given region is closer to that seed point than 
any other. Voronoi tessellations can be used in various density and 
spatial analysis, e.g. for characterizing membranes or interaction 
surfaces/binding sites. 

Voronoi tessellation and related algorithms (e.g. Delaunay triangulation) 
have been implemented in scipy (https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/spatial.html#delaunay-triangulation-convex-hulls-and-voronoi-diagrams).

## Ring puckering ##

Ring groups can adopt a variety of “puckered” geometries that influence 
their physical and chemical properties. Several formulations exist for 
quantifying this puckering, e.g. Pickett angles [[Strauss 1970]](#Strauss1970), 
Cremer-Pople [[Cremer 1975]](#Cremer1975), and Hill-Reilly [[Hill 2007]](#Hill2007).

MDAnalysis currently features tools for assessing puckering in 5-membered 
rings in our [nucleic acid analysis module](https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/analysis/nuclinfo.html); 
however, such capabilities are lacking for 6 (or higher) membered rings.

> 

Reviewer: Do we need a where to start here?

1. identify rings
2. calculate CP angles
3. calculate HR angles
4. test against known test cases

Author: I have no idea, that's not something I've ever done. I think you originally proposed the project. We could merge "as is" and then you can update later to make it sound the way that you imagined.

Reviewer: I think what I'm pointing out is an inconsistency across the summaries, we have some with objectives, some with where to start,

Author: If someone wants to make it homogenous then that's fine. I think we should use whatever works. I tend to use "Objectives" as a clear "This is what's needed and when you've done it then you have achieved something" but that might not always be the best way to phrase an open-ended idea.

DSSP [[Kabsch 1983]](#Kabsch1983) calculate backbone dihedral angles
and hydrogen-bonding energy from atomic coordinate to assign secondary 
stucture based on a database of assignments.

MDAnalysis does not currently feature a tool for the identification
of secondary structure features (see issues 
[#1612](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/issues/1612) and 
[#2608](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/issues/2608)). 
The ability to make atomselections based on the calculated
secondary structure could also be of great use.

### Where to start
- Become familiar with the algorithms below and investigate
external tools that already implement these (e.g.
[mkdspp](https://www.mankier.com/1/mkdssp#Synopsis),
- Add a `SecondaryStructure` class, using `AnalysisBase`, that uses
DSSP and/or STRIDE, implemented natively or using an external
tool as a dependency, to calculate the secondary structure of a
selection in each frame.
- Consider allowing the calculated secondary structure to be read
back alongside the trajectory e.g. using the [Auxilliary
module](https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/auxiliary/init.html),

> and allow for atomselections based on secondary structure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and allow for atom selections based on secondary structure.
```
